# Applied Data Analysis: A Psychosocial Statistical Investigation

## A Psychosocial Investigation on Family History of Suicide

* **Melanie Gruben**
* **Department of Psychology, University of Limerick**
* **PS6051: Advanced Analysis (Statistics)**
* **Dr. Siobhan Howard**
* **11 December, 2021**

### Abstract
* Tendency toward suicide is seen to run in families, both genetically and socially. My aim in this study was to investigate any relationships between history of blood relative suicide and an individual’s depression scores. Additionally, I broke this query down into different types of loss, such as those of individual types of family members. I also sought to investigate any relationship between blood relative suicide and thoughts of death or suicide in an individual. Finally, I analysed the body of data for any connection between blood relative suicide and individual history of depression. To conduct this research, I used the Midlife in the US 2 data set of 2004 to 2009 and conducted statistical analyses through SPSS software. Six statistical analyses were conducted: four multivariate analyses of variance, one independent samples t-test, and one Chi square analysis. Results were not significant and, in light of other literature on the topic, inconclusive. Possible reasons for non-significance are discussed, in addition to recommendations for future studies on individual suicidality and blood relative suicide.


#### Introduction
* Completed suicide within a family can have resounding effects on surviving family members (Cerel et al, 2008). With suicide being historically stigmatized in the Western world, the nature of the death may prevent support from both family and outside social networks, report Cerel et al. Survivors experience a kind of grief which requires special care; they themselves may experience resulting depression and increased suicidal ideation. In fact, one study of a Swedish group of suicide survivors (n=33,173) and a comparison group (n=28,945) found that individuals who lost a first-degree family member to suicide were twice as likely to die by suicide (Runeson & Asberg, 2003). According to one study on patients with a family history of suicide (n=243) more than half (56.7%) had a depressive disorder (Roy, 1983). Interestingly, twin and adoption studies on suicidality found that tendency towards suicide runs in families, even without social influences like completed suicide or negative affectivity (Brent & Mann, 2005). Indeed, studies of families indicate a genetic relationship between depression and suicidality (Jeon, 2011). Even still, mere exposure to suicide of a loved one may induce depressive disorders, regardless of whether the survivor is related by blood. Bridge et al. (2003) found that adolescents exposed to the suicidal death of a friend were much more at risk for new-onset major depressive disorder, particularly if the participant felt responsible for their friend’s death in some way.
* I hypothesized that there is a relationship between family suicide and depressive symptoms. Our aim was to examine whether any relationship was found within the Midlife in the United States (MIDUS 2) Biomarker project dataset (Ryff et al., 2017). To explore a possible relationship, I conducted statistical analyses using longitudinal data collected between 2004 and 2009 from over 1,000 participants in the United States. Firstly, I hypothesized that participants that had lost blood relatives to suicide would score higher on the MASQ Scale for General Distress—Depressive Symptoms (Watson & Clark, 1991). Secondly, I hypothesized that participants who had lost blood relatives to suicide would score higher on the MASQ Scale for Loss of Interest (a form of depression measure). Thirdly, I hypothesized that there may be differences in effect size through types of relationship (mother, father, sibling lost to suicide). Fourthly, I hypothesized that thinking about death or suicide (as a single item of the MASQ scale) would be associated with blood relative suicide. Finally, I hypothesized that a history of depression would be associated with blood relative suicide.
#### Methods
* **Design**
* This study implemented a between-subjects design by examining data from the MIDUS 2 Biomarker project. The MIDUS 2 was a longitudinal aging study conducted in the United States which measured physiological, psychological, and sociological data. In this study on suicidality, multiple MIDUS 2 variables were used: Blood Relative Suicide, Mother Suicide, Father Suicide, Sibling Suicide, Distress-Depressive Symptoms, Loss of Interest, Thinking about Death or Suicide, and Ever Had Depression. 
* **Participants**
* The MIDUS 2 was a survey of over 7,000 non-institutionalized, English-speaking Americans between the ages of 25 and 74 (Ryff, 2019). Participants were recruited from telephone banks using random digit dialing (RDD) sampling methods, with city-specific oversampling measures to balance ethnic and geographic representation (Radler, 2014). After an initial national sample of all mainland states in the United States, a smaller Milwaukee sample of African American persons was recruited. While RDD has been used with great popularity in many studies (Massey, 1997), some limitations of RDD sampling are explored in the discussion below. In the subsection of MIDUS 2 data used in this study, (n=1255), 56.8% of participants were female (n=713) and 43.2% were male (n=542). In terms of age, approximately 10% of participants were 30-39 (n=125), 28% were 40-49 (n=349), 30% were 50-59 (n=376), 20.6% were 60-69 (n=258), 9% were 70-79 (n=113), and 2.7% were 80-89 (n=34). The sample as a whole was aging, true to the nature of the study (M=54.52, SD=11.71) with men aged only slightly older (M=55.14, SD=11.93) than women (M=54.05, SD=11.53). Limited geographical information is available, but data for time zone residence was collected, 31% Eastern Standard Time (n=384), 43.5% Central Standard Time (n=546), 10.1% Mountain Standard Time (n=127) and 15.4% Pacific Standard Time (n=193). 
* ***Materials***
* This study on suicidality drew on a subset of the MIDUS 2 dataset which was conducted in the United States. It utilised a series of categorical and scale variables in various analytical roles.
* *Independent Variables*
* Multiple categorical variables were used as independent variables. In the MIDUS 2, the “Blood Relatives Suicide” question could be answered with “Yes”, “No”, or “Don’t know”. The same was true for “Mother Suicide”, “Father Suicide”, and “Siblings Suicide” (possible answers “Yes”, “No”, or “Don’t know”). 
* *Dependent Variables*
* Multiple scale variables were used as dependent variables. First, the Mood Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (MASQ) on General Distress-Depression Symptoms was used, as well as the MASQ on Loss of Interest. These two measures drew from a series of Likert-style items such as “Felt Pessimistic about the Future” which could be answered as “Not at All”, “A Little Bit”, “Moderately”, “Quite a Bit”, “Extremely”, or “Don’t Know”. An additional scale variable was a single item isolated from the rest of the MASQ: “Thought About Death or Suicide”. The answer options for this single item on suicide were the same as the other MASQ measures, including “Not at All…”, and so on.
* Finally, a single categorical variable was used as a dependent variable: “Ever Had Depression.” Participants could answer “Yes”, “No”, or “Don’t Know”.
* *Procedure*
* All these variables were tested for possible relationships. Quantitative analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS statistical software.
* **Overview of Analyses**
* Six statistical analyses were conducted to investigate any relationships between these variables. 
* *Blood Relatives Suicide X MASQ*
* A general linear model multiple analysis of variance (MANOVA) was conducted to explore any relationship between Blood Relatives Suicide and scores on the MASQ on Distress-Depression and MASQ on Loss of Interest.
* *Mother Suicide X MASQ*
* In order to investigate whether effect sizes varied for individual relationships, a second MANOVA was conducted to investigate relationships between Mother Suicide and scores on the MASQ on Distress-Depression and MASQ on Loss of Interest.
* *Father Suicide X MASQ*
* In interest of controlling for individual relationships, a third MANOVA was conducted with variables of Father Suicide and scores on the MASQ on Distress-Depression and MASQ on Loss of Interest scales.
* *Sibling Suicide X MASQ*
* The fourth and final MANOVA was conducted to explore any relationships between Sibling Suicide and scores on the MASQ on Distress-Depression and MASQ on Loss of Interest measures.
* *Blood Relatives Suicide X Thinking About Suicide*
* An independent samples t-test was conducted to investigate associations between Blood Relatives Suicide and Thinking About Death or Suicide.
* *Blood Relatives Suicide X Ever Had Depression*
* Finally, a Chi square analysis was conducted to analyse whether the Blood Relatives Suicide and Ever Had Depression variables were related.
### Results
* *Blood Relatives Suicide X MASQ*
* A MANOVA was conducted to explore any relationship between Blood Relatives Suicide and scores on the MASQ on Distress-Depression and MASQ on Loss of Interest. There was no significant difference in MASQ scores between participants who had or had not experienced Blood Relatives Suicide, F(1,1235) = .10, p = .750, Wilk's Λ = 1, partial η2 < .001.; F(1,1235) = .22, p = .641, Wilk's Λ = 1, partial η2 < 001.
* *Mother Suicide X MASQ*
* A second MANOVA was conducted to explore any difference in MASQ scores between participants who did or did not lose their mother to suicide. There was no significant difference in MASQ scores between participants who had or had not lose their mother to suicide, F(1,105) = .38, p = .538, Wilk's Λ = .99, partial η2 = .004.; F(1,105) = .06, p = .811, Wilk's Λ = .99, partial η2 = 001.
* *Father Suicide X MASQ*
* A third MANOVA was conducted to explore any difference in MASQ scores between participants who did or did not lose their father to suicide. There was no significant difference in MASQ scores between participants who had or had not lose their father to suicide, F(1,104) < .001, p = .995, Wilk's Λ = .03, partial η2 < .001.; F(1,104) = .02, p = .904, Wilk's Λ = .03, partial η2 < 001.
* *Sibling Suicide X MASQ*
* A fourth MANOVA was conducted to explore any difference in MASQ scores between participants who did or did not lose a sibling to suicide. There was no significant difference in MASQ scores between participants who had or had not lose a sibling to suicide, F(1,105) = .03, p = .865, Wilk's Λ = .23, partial η2 < .001.; F(1,105) = .04, p = .849, Wilk's Λ = .23, partial η2 < 001.
* *Blood Relatives Suicide X Thinking About Death or Suicide*
* An independent samples t-test was conducted to assess whether participants who had lost a blood relative to suicide were more likely to have recently thought about death or suicide. Results were not significant and there was no difference between groups, t(1231) = -4.3, p = .665. 
* *Blood Relatives Suicide X Ever Had Depression*
* A Chi square analysis was conducted to investigate whether participants who had lost a blood relative to suicide were more likely to have a history of depression. The results were significant (X2(1, N = 1221) = 8.06, p = .005), however the relationship was in the opposite direction as expected, where participants who had lost a blood relative to suicide were less likely to have ever had depression.
 
### Discussion
* While these results were unexpected by the authors, there is some existing literature which lends credence to these nonsignificant results. It is important to consider post-traumatic growth as a form of resilience, where suffering a devastating event may make it easier for a person to cope with more routine stressors down the line (Westphal & Bonanno, 2007). In this case, a survivor of family suicide may have the genetics of depression but be able to cope with current stressors more fluently, preventing the onset of a depressive episode. It is possible that they are lower in distress, but the notion of suicidality stays with them. Indeed, Campos and Holden (2018) found that while family survivors of suicide were at high risk for suicidality for the lifetime, they tended not to rate high on distress scales. Bereavement interventions for survivors of family suicide have also shown to be effective in reducing depression and anxiety (Pfeffer et al., 2002); it is not clear in the MIDUS data how many suicide survivors may have undergone psychological “post-ventions”, as Pfeffer et al. phrased it. 

* The quality of family interaction following completed suicide also has an effect on risk of suicide, where cohesive and communicative families may grow closer or stronger after a suicide loss (Frey & Cerel, 2015). According to Jaques (2000), open and available social support is a protective factor for suicidality among suicide-bereaved families. However, religious affiliation can be a risk factor, causing shame and anger within a family when following other types of death religion may provide comfort (Jaques, 2000). In future studies with additional types of data, it would be advantageous to control for emotional resilience, bereavement post-ventions, family cohesion, and family religious affiliation.

* The RDD sampling procedures of the MIDUS 2 should also be examined as some studies have found that RDD sampling skews toward individuals who are of higher socio-economic status and who take better care of their health (Olson et al., 1992; Wang et al, 2009). It may be that participants in this study were more likely to seek or afford care for any mental health issues after a family suicide; secondly, some research has shown a connection between poverty and suicidality (Iemmi et al., 2016). It is possible that data obtained from RDD sampling procedures reveals little about individuals who are facing depression worsened by poverty or who may not have access to health services. While the MIDUS 2 did control for income quite thoroughly (Friedman & Herd, 2010), household income is not a sure-fire marker of socioeconomic status; consider caregivers, chronically ill persons, and student debt holders in the economic landscape of the United States. Further study is needed which explores qualitative aspects of participants’ social environment post-loss, in addition to how much they have utilised mental health services and where they stand financially. In future, new datasets should be utilised in pursuing these research questions.


### References
* Bridge, J. A., Day, N. L., Richardson, G. A., Birmaher, B., & Brent, D. A. (2003). Major depressive disorder in adolescents exposed to a friend's suicide. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 42(11), 1294-1300. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.chi.0000084830.67701.9
* Brent, D. A., & Mann, J. J. (2005). Family genetic studies, suicide, and suicidal behavior. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C: Seminars in Medical Genetics, 133(1), 13-24. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.30042
* Campos, R. C., Holden, R. R., & Santos, S. (2018). Exposure to suicide in the family: Suicide risk and psychache in individuals who have lost a family member by suicide. Journal of clinical psychology, 74(3), 407-417. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22518
* Frey, L. M., & Cerel, J. (2015). Risk for suicide and the role of family: A narrative review. Journal of Family Issues, 36(6), 716-736. https://doi.org/10.1177/0192513X13515885
* Cerel, J., Jordan, J. R., & Duberstein, P. R. (2008). The impact of suicide on the family. Crisis: the Journal of Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention, 29(1), 38-44. https://doi.org/10.1027/0227-5910.29.1.38
* Friedman, E. M., & Herd, P. (2010). Income, education, and inflammation: differential associations in a national probability sample (The MIDUS study). Psychosomatic Medicine, 72(3), 290. https://doi.org/10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181cfe4c2
* Iemmi, V., Bantjes, J., Coast, E., Channer, K., Leone, T., McDaid, D., & Lund, C. (2016). Suicide and poverty in low-income and middle-income countries: a systematic review. The Lancet Psychiatry, 3(8), 774-783. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30066-9
* Jeon, H. J. (2011). Depression and suicide. Journal of the Korean Medical Association, 54(4), 370-375. https://doi.org/10.5124/jkma.2011.54.4.370
* Massey, J. T., O’Connor, D., & Krotki, K. (1997, August). Response rates in random digit dialing (RDD) telephone surveys. In Proceedings of the American Statistical Association, Section on Survey Research Methods (Vol. 1997, pp. 707-12). 
* Olson, S. H., Kelsey, J. L., Pearson, T. A., & Levin, B. (1992). Evaluation of random digit dialing as a method of control selection in case–control studies. American Journal of Epidemiology, 135(2), 210-222. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a116273
* Pfeffer, C. R., Jiang, H., Kakuma, T., Hwang, J., & Metsch, M. (2002). Group intervention for children bereaved by the suicide of a relative. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 41(5), 505-513. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200205000-00007
* Radler, B.T., (2014). The Midlife in the United States (MIDUS) series: A national longitudinal study of health and well-being. Open Health Data, 2(1), e3.  http://doi.org/10.5334/ohd.ai
* Roy, A. (1983). Family history of suicide. Archives of General Psychiatry, 40(9), 971-974. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1983.01790080053007
* Runeson, B., & Åsberg, M. (2003). Family history of suicide among suicide victims. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(8), 1525-1526.https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.160.8.1525
* Ryff, C. D., Seeman, T., & Weinstein, M. (2017). Midlife in the United States (MIDUS 2): Biomarker Project, 2004-2009. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 10. https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR29282.v9
* Wang, P. P., & Parfrey, P. S. (2009). Validity of random-digit-dialing in recruiting controls in a case-control study. American Journal of Health Behavior, 33(5), 513.
* Watson, D., & Clark, A. L. (1991). The Mood and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire (MASQ). Unpublished manuscript, University of Iowa, Iowa City
* Westphal, M., & Bonanno, G. A. (2007). Posttraumatic growth and resilience to trauma: Different sides of the same coin or different coins?. Applied Psychology, 56(3), 417-427. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-0597.2007.00298.x

